<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>An Interlude</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="interlude" epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Interlude</h2>
			<p>Orinthia’s boudoir at half-past fifteen on the same day. She is at her writing-table scribbling notes. She is romantically beautiful, and beautifully dressed. As the table is against the wall near a corner, with the other wall on her left, her back alone is visible from the middle of the room. The door is near the corner diagonally opposite. There is a large settee in the middle of the room.</p>
			<p>The King enters and waits on the threshold.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Crossly, without looking round.</i> Who is that?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>His Majesty the King.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>I don’t want to see him.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>How soon will you be disengaged?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>I didn’t say I was engaged. Tell the king I don’t want to see him.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>He awaits your pleasure. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He comes in and seats himself on the settee.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Go away. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A pause.</i> I won’t speak to you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Another pause.</i> If my private rooms are to be broken into at any moment because they are in the palace, and the king is not a gentleman, I must take a house outside. I am writing to the agents about one now.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>What is our quarrel today, belovéd?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Ask your conscience.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>I have none when you are concerned. You must tell me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She takes a book from the table and rises; then sweeps superbly forward to the settee and flings the book into his hands.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>There!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>What is this?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Page 16. Look at it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking at the title on the back of the book.</i> “Songs of our Great Great Grandparents.” What page did you say?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Between her teeth.</i> Six-teen.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Opening the book and finding the page, his eye lighting up with recognition as he looks at it.</i> Ah! The Pilgrim of Love!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Read the first three words⁠—if you dare.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Smiling as he caresses the phrase.</i> “Orinthia, my belovéd.”</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>The name you pretended to invent specially for me, the only women in the world for you. Picked up out of the rubbish basket in a secondhand bookseller’s! And I thought you were a poet!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Well, one poet may consecrate a name for another. Orinthia is a name full of magic for me. It could not be that if I had invented it myself. I heard it at a concert of ancient music when I was a child; and I have treasured it ever since.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>You always have a pretty excuse. You are the King of liars and humbugs. You cannot understand how a falsehood like that wounds me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Remorsefully, stretching out his arms towards her.</i> Belovéd: I am sorry.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Put your hands in your pockets: they shall not touch me ever again.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Obeying.</i> Don’t pretend to be hurt unless you really are, dearest. It wrings my heart.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Since when have you set up a heart? Did you buy that, too, secondhand?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>I have something in me that winces when you are hurt⁠—or pretend to be.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Contemptuously.</i> Yes: I have only to squeal, and you will take me up and pet me as you would a puppy run over by a car. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sitting down beside him, but beyond arm’s length.</i> That is what you give me when my heart demands love. I had rather you kicked me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>I should like to kick you sometimes, when you are specially aggravating. But I shouldn’t do it well. I should be afraid of hurting you all the time.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>I believe you would sign my death warrant without turning a hair.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>That is true, in a way. It is wonderful how subtle your mind is, as far as it goes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>It does not go as far as yours, I suppose.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>I don’t know. Our minds go together half way. Whether it is that your mind stops there or else that the road forks, and you take the high road and I take the low road, I cannot say; but somehow after a certain point we lose one another.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>And then you go back to your Amandas and Lysistratas: creatures whose idea of romance is a minister in love with a department, and whose bedside books are blue books.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>They are not always thinking of some man or other. That is a rather desirable extension of their interests, in my opinion. If Lysistrata had a lover I should not be interested in him in the least; and she would bore me to distraction if she could talk of nothing else. But I am very much interested in her department. Her devotion to it gives us a topic of endless interest.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Well, go to her: I am not detaining you. But don’t tell her that I have nothing to talk about but men; for that is a lie; and you know it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>It is, as you say, a lie; and I know it. But I did not say it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>You implied it. You meant it. When those ridiculous political women are with us you talk to them all the time, and never say a word to me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Nor you to me. We cannot talk to one another in public: we have nothing to say that could be said before other people. Yet we find enough to say to one another when we are alone together. Would you change that if you could?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>You are as slippery as an eel; but you shall not slip through my fingers. Why do you surround yourself with political bores and frumps and dowdy busybodies who can’t talk: they can only debate about their dull departments and their fads and their election chances. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising impatiently.</i> Who could talk to such people? If it were not for the nonentities of wives and husbands they drag about with them, there would be nobody to talk to at all. And even they can talk of nothing but the servants and the baby. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Suddenly returning to her seat.</i> Listen to me, Magnus. Why can you not be a real king?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>In what way, belovédest?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Send all these stupid people packing. Make them do their drudgeries in their departments without bothering you about it, as you make your servants sweep the floors and dust the furniture. Live a really noble and beautiful life⁠—a kingly life⁠—with me. What you need to make you a real king is a real queen.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>But I have got one.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Oh, you are blind. You are worse than blind: you have low tastes. Heaven is offering you a rose; and you cling to a cabbage.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughing.</i> That is a very apt metaphor, belovéd. But what wise man, if you force him to choose between doing without roses and doing without cabbages, would not secure the cabbages? Besides, all these old married cabbages were once roses; and, though young things like you don’t remember that, their husbands do. They don’t notice the change. Besides, you should know better than anyone else that when a man gets tired of his wife and leaves her it is never because she has lost her good looks. The new love is often older and uglier than the old.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Why should I know it better than anyone else?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Why, because you have been married twice; and both your husbands have run away from you to much plainer and stupider women. When I begged your present husband to come back to court for a while for the sake of appearances he said no man could call his soul his own in the same house with you. And yet that man was utterly infatuated with your beauty when he married you. Your first husband actually forced a good wife to divorce him so that he might marry you; but before two years were out he went back to her and died in her arms, poor chap.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Shall I tell you why these men could not live with me? It was because I am a thoroughbred, and they were only hacks. They had nothing against me: I was perfectly faithful to them. I kept their houses beautifully: I fed them better than they had ever been fed in their lives. But because I was higher than they were, and greater, they could not stand the strain of trying to live up to me. So I let them go their way, poor wretches, back to their cabbages. Look at the old creature Ignatius is living with now! She gives you his real measure.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>An excellent woman. Ignatius is quite happy with her. I never saw a man so changed.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Just what he is fit for. Commonplace. Bourgeoise. She trots through the streets shopping. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising.</i> I tread the plains of Heaven. Common women cannot come where I am; and common men find themselves out and slink away.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>It must be magnificent to have the consciousness of a goddess without ever doing a thing to justify it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Give me a goddess’s work to do; and I will do it. I will even stoop to a queen’s work if you will share the throne with me. But do not pretend that people become great by doing great things. They do great things because they are great, if the great things come along. But they are great just the same when the great things do not come along. If I never did anything but sit in this room and powder my face and tell you what a clever fool you are, I should still be heavens high above the millions of common women who do their domestic duty, and sacrifice themselves, and run Trade departments and all the rest of the vulgarities. Has all the tedious public work you have done made you any the better? I have seen you before and after your boasted strokes of policy; and you were the same man, and would have been the same man to me and to yourself if you had never done them. Thank God my self-consciousness is something nobler than vulgar conceit in having done something. It is what I am, not what I do, that you must worship in me. If you want deeds, go to your men and women of action, as you call them, who are all in a conspiracy to pretend that the mechanical things they do, the foolhardy way they risk their worthless lives, or their getting up in the morning at four and working sixteen hours a day for thirty years, like coral insects, make them great. What are they for? these dull slaves? To keep the streets swept for me. To enable me to reign over them in beauty like the stars without having anything to do with their slavery except to console it, to dazzle it, to enable them to forget it in adoring dreams of me. Am I not worth it? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She sits, fascinating him.</i> Look into my eyes and tell the truth. Am I worth it or not?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>To me, who love beauty, yes. But you should hear the speeches Balbus makes about your pension.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>And my debts: do not forget my debts, my mortgages, the bill of sale on my furniture, the thousands I have had from the moneylenders to save me from being sold up because I will not borrow from my friends. Lecture me again about them; but do not dare pretend that the people grudge me my pension. They glory in it, and in my extravagance, as you call it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">More gravely.</i> By the way, Orinthia, when your dressmakers took up that last bill for you, they were speculating, were they not, in your chances of becoming my queen some day?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Well, what if they were?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>They would hardly have ventured on that without a hint from somebody. Was it from you?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>You think me capable of that! You have a very low side to you, Magnus.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>No doubt: like other mortal fabrics I have a wrong side and a right side. But it is no use your giving yourself airs, belovédest. You are capable of anything. Do you deny that there was some suggestion of the kind?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>How dare you challenge me to deny it? I never deny. Of course there was a suggestion of the kind.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>I thought so.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Oh, stupid! stupid! Go keep a grocer’s shop: that is what you are fit for. Do you suppose that the suggestion came from me? Why, you great oaf, it is in the air: when my dressmaker hinted at it I told her that if she ever dared to repeat such a thing she should never get another order from me. But can I help people seeing what is as plain as the sun in the heavens? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising again.</i> Everyone knows that I am the real queen. Everyone treats me as the real queen. They cheer me in the streets. When I open one of the art exhibitions or launch a new ship they crowd the place out. I am one of Nature’s queens; and they know it. If you do not, you are not one of Nature’s kings.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Sublime! Nothing but genuine inspiration could give a woman such cheek.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Yes: inspiration, not cheek. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sitting as before.</i> Magnus: when are you going to face my destiny, and your own?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>But my wife? the queen? What is to become of my poor dear Jemima?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Oh, drown her: shoot her: tell your chauffeur to drive her into the Serpentine and leave her there. The woman makes you ridiculous.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>I don’t think I should like that. And the public would think it illnatured.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Oh, you know what I mean. Divorce her. Make her divorce you. It is quite easy. That was how Ronny married me. Everybody does it when they need a change.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>But I can’t imagine what I should do without Jemima.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Nobody else can imagine what you do with her. But you need not do without her. You can see as much of her as you like when we are married. I shall not be jealous and make scenes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>That is very magnanimous of you. But I am afraid it does not settle the difficulty. Jemima would not think it right to keep up her present intimacy with me if I were married to you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>What a woman! Would she be in any worse position then than I am in now?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>No.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>You mean, then, that you do not mind placing me in a position that you do not think good enough for her?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Orinthia: I did not place you in your present position. You placed yourself in it. I could not resist you. You gathered me like a daisy.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Did you want to resist me?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Oh no. I never resist temptation, because I have found that things that are bad for me do not tempt me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Well, then, what are we talking about?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>I forget. I think I was explaining the impossibility of my wife changing places with you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Why impossible, pray?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>I cannot make you understand: you see you have never been really married, though you have led two captives to the altar, and borne children to one of them. Being your husband is only a job for which one man will do as well as another, and which the last man holds subject to six months notice in the divorce court. Being my wife is something quite different. The smallest derogation to Jemima’s dignity would hit me like the lash of a whip across the face. About yours, somehow, I do not care a rap.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Nothing can derogate from my dignity: it is divine. Hers is only a convention: that is why you tremble when it is challenged.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Not a bit. It is because she is a part of my real workaday self. You belong to fairyland.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Suppose she dies! Will you die too?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Not immediately. I shall have to carry on as best I can without her, though the prospect terrifies me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Might not carrying on without her include marrying me?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>My dear Orinthia, I had rather marry the devil. Being a wife is not your job.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>You think so because you have no imagination. And you don’t know me because I have never let you really possess me. I should make you more happy than any man has ever yet been on earth.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>I defy you to make me more happy than our strangely innocent relations have already made me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising restlessly.</i> You talk like a child or a saint. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turning on him.</i> I can give you a new life: one of which you have no conception. I can give you beautiful, wonderful children: have you ever seen a lovelier boy than my Basil?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Your children are beautiful; but they are fairy children; and I have several very real ones already. A divorce would not sweep them out of the way of the fairies.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>In short, when your golden moment comes⁠—when the gates of heaven open before you, you are afraid to come out of your pigsty.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>If I am a pig, a pigsty is the proper place for me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>I cannot understand it. All men are fools and moral cowards when you come to know them. But you are less of a fool and less of a moral coward than any man I have ever known. You have almost the makings of a first rate woman in you. When I leave the earth and soar up to the regions which are my real eternal home, you can follow me: I can speak to you as I can speak to no one else; and you can say things to me that would just make your stupid wife cry. There is more of you in me than of any other man within my reach. There is more of me in you than of any other woman within your reach. We are meant for oneanother: it is written across the sky that you and I are queen and king. How can you hesitate? What attraction is there for you in your common healthy jolly lumps of children and your common housekeeper wife and the rabble of dowdies and upstarts and intriguers and clowns that think they are governing the country when they are only squabbling with you? Look again at me, man: again and again. Am I not worth a million such? Is not life with me as high above them as the sun is above the gutter?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Yes yes yes yes, of course. You are lovely: you are divine. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She cannot restrain a gesture of triumph.</i> And you are enormously amusing.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">This anti-climax is too much for Orinthia’s exaltation; but she is too clever not to appreciate it. With another gesture, this time of deflation, she sits down at his left hand with an air of suffering patience, and listens in silence to the harangue which follows.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Some day perhaps Nature will graft the roses on the cabbages and make every woman as enchanting as you; and then what a glorious lark life will be! But at present, what I come here for is to enjoy talking to you like this when I need an hour’s respite from royalty: when my stupid wife has been worrying me, or my jolly lumps of children bothering me, or my turbulent Cabinet obstructing me: when, as the doctors say, what I need is a change. You see, my dear, there is no wife on earth so precious, no children so jolly, no Cabinet so tactful that it is impossible ever to get tired of them. Jemima has her limitations, as you have observed. And I have mine. Now if our limitations exactly corresponded I should never want to talk to anyone else; and neither would she. But as that never happens, we are like all other married couples: that is, there are subjects which can never be discussed between us because they are sore subjects. There are people we avoid mentioning to oneanother because one of us likes them and the other doesn’t. Not only individuals, but whole sorts of people. For instance, your sort. My wife doesn’t like your sort, doesn’t understand it, mistrusts and dreads it. Not without reason; for women like you are dangerous to wives. But I don’t dislike your sort: I understand it, being a little in that line myself. At all events I am not afraid of it; though the least allusion to it brings a cloud over my wife’s face. So when I want to talk freely about it I come and talk to you. And I take it she talks to friends of hers about people of whom she never talks to me. She has men friends from whom she can get some things that she cannot get from me. If she didn’t do so she would be limited by my limitations, which would end in her hating me. So I always do my best to make her men friends feel at home with us.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>A model husband in a model household! And when the model household becomes a bore, I am the diversion.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Well, what more can you ask? Do not let us fall into the common mistake of expecting to become one flesh and one spirit. Every star has its own orbit; and between it and its nearest neighbor there is not only a powerful attraction but an infinite distance. When the attraction becomes stronger than the distance the two do not embrace: they crash together in ruin. We two also have our orbits, and must keep an infinite distance between us to avoid a disastrous collision. Keeping our distance is the whole secret of good manners; and without good manners human society is intolerable and impossible.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Would any other woman stand your sermons, and even like them?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Orinthia: we are only two children at play; and you must be content to be my queen in fairyland. And <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">rising</i> I must go back to my work.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>What work have you that is more important than being with me?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>None.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Then sit down.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Unfortunately, this silly business of government must be carried on. And there is a crisis this evening, as usual.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>But the crisis is not until five: I heard all about it from Sempronius. Why do you encourage that greedy schemer Proteus? He humbugs you. He humbugs everybody. He even humbugs himself; and of course he humbugs that Cabinet which is a disgrace to you: it is like an overcrowded third class carriage. Why do you allow such riffraff to waste your time? After all, what are you paid for? To be a king: that is, to wipe your boots on common people.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Yes: but this king business, as the Americans call it, has got itself so mixed up with democracy that half the country expects me to wipe my perfectly polished boots on the Cabinet, and the other half expects me to let the Cabinet wipe its muddy boots on me. The Crisis at five o’clock is to decide which of us is to be the doormat.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>And you will condescend to fight with Proteus for power?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Oh no: I never fight. But I sometimes win.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>If you let yourself be beaten by that trickster and poseur, never dare to approach me again.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Proteus is a clever fellow: even on occasion a fine fellow. It would give me no satisfaction to beat him: I hate beating people. But there would be some innocent fun in outwitting him.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Magnus: you are a mollycoddle. If you were a real man you would just delight in beating him to a jelly.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>A real man would never do as a king. I am only an idol, my love; and all I can do is to draw the line at being a cruel idol. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He looks at his watch.</i> Now I must really be off. Au revoir.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking at her wrist watch.</i> But it is only twenty-five minutes past four. You have heaps of time before five.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Yes; but tea is at half-past four.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Catching him by the arm with a snakelike dart.</i> Never mind your tea. I will give you your tea.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Impossible, belovéd. Jemima does not like to be kept waiting.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Oh, bother Jemima! You shall not leave me to go to Jemima. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She pulls him back so vigorously that he falls into the seat beside her.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>My dear, I must.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>No, not today. Listen, Magnus. I have something very particular to say to you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>You have not. You are only trying to make me late to annoy my wife. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He tries to rise, but is pulled back.</i> Let me go, please.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Holding on.</i> Why are you so afraid of your wife? You are the laughing stock of London, you poor henpecked darling.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Henpecked! What do you call this? At least my wife does not restrain me by bodily violence.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>I will not be deserted for your old Dutch.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Listen, Orinthia. Don’t be absurd. You know I must go. Do be good.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Only ten minutes more.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>It is half-past already.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He tries to rise; but she holds him back.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pausing for breath.</i> You are doing this out of sheer devilment. You are so abominably strong that I cannot break loose without hurting you. Must I call the guard?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>Do, do. It will be in all the papers tomorrow.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Fiend. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Summoning all his dignity.</i> Orinthia: I command you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs wildly.</i> !!!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Furious.</i> Very well, then, you she-devil: you shall let go.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He tackles her in earnest. She flings her arms round him and holds on with mischievous enjoyment. There is a tapping at the door; they do not hear it. As he is breaking loose she suddenly shifts her grip to his waist and drags him on to the floor, where they roll over one another. Sempronius enters. He stares at the scandalous scene for a moment; then hastily slips out; shuts the door; clears his throat and blows his nose noisily; and knocks loudly and repeatedly. The two combatants cease hostilities and scramble hastily to their feet.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Come in.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sempronius</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Entering.</i> Her Majesty sent me to remind you that tea is waiting, sir.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Magnus</td>
						<td>Thank you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He goes quickly out.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Panting but greatly pleased with herself.</i> The King forgets everything when he is here. So do I, I am afraid. I am so sorry.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sempronius</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Stiffly.</i> No explanations are needed. I saw what happened. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He goes out.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orinthia</td>
						<td>The beast! He must have looked through the keyhole. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She throws her hand up with a gesture of laughing defiance, and dances back to her seat at the writing-table.</i></td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
